README.md, before:

# tutr - Terminal Utility for Con(T)extual Responses

A stupid simple, AI-powered terminal assistant that generates commands from natural language.

## Documentation

Docs website: https://spi3.github.io/tutr/index.html

## What does it do?

Generates terminal commands from natural language queries.

``` bash
> tutr git create and switch to a new branch called testing

  git checkout -b testing
```

``` bash
> tutr go back to the previous directory

  cd -
```

## Installation

Requires Python 3.10+.

```bash
pipx install tutr
```

Or run it without installing:

```bash
uvx tutr
```

For development from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/spi/tutr.git
cd tutr
uv sync
```

## Setup

On first run, tutr launches an interactive setup to select your provider, model, and API key:

```
$ tutr git "show recent commits"

Welcome to tutr! Let's get you set up.

Select your LLM provider:
  1. Gemini
  2. Anthropic
  3. OpenAI
  4. Ollama (local, no API key needed)

  Enter choice (1-4): 1

Enter your Gemini API key:
  API key:

Select a model:
  1. Gemini 3 Flash (recommended)
  2. Gemini 2.0 Flash
  3. Gemini 2.5 Pro

  Enter choice (1-3): 1

Configuration saved to ~/.tutr/config.json
```

Setup is skipped if `~/.tutr/config.json` already exists or provider API key environment variables are set.

To re-run or modify configuration at any time:

```bash
tutr-cli configure
```

## Usage

```
tutr <command> <what you want to do>
```

## Auto-start in Every Terminal

`tutr` is an interactive shell wrapper. To launch it automatically for every new
interactive terminal, add this to your shell rc file.

### Bash (`~/.bashrc`)

```bash
if [[ $- == *i* ]] && [[ -z "${TUTR_AUTOSTARTED:-}" ]] && [[ -z "${TUTR_SKIP_AUTOSTART:-}" ]]; then
  export TUTR_AUTOSTARTED=1
  exec tutr
fi
```

### Zsh (`~/.zshrc`)

```zsh
if [[ -o interactive ]] && [[ -z "${TUTR_AUTOSTARTED:-}" ]] && [[ -z "${TUTR_SKIP_AUTOSTART:-}" ]]; then
  export TUTR_AUTOSTARTED=1
  exec tutr
fi
```

Notes:
- `TUTR_AUTOSTARTED` prevents recursion when `tutr` sources your normal rc file.
- Set `TUTR_SKIP_AUTOSTART=1` before opening a terminal to temporarily bypass autostart.
- Active wrapped shells show a prompt prefix (default `[tutr]`) and set `TUTR_ACTIVE=1`.
- Customize the prefix with `TUTR_PROMPT_PREFIX` (example: `export TUTR_PROMPT_PREFIX="[ai]"`).
- Use `tutr-cli ...` if you want the original one-shot command generator behavior.

### Examples

```bash
tutr git "create and switch to a new branch called testing"
tutr sed "replace all instances of 'foo' with 'bar' in myfile.txt"
tutr curl "http://example.com and display all request headers"
```

### Arguments

| Argument | Description |
|---|---|
| `command` | The terminal command to get help with (e.g., `git`, `sed`, `curl`) |
| `query` | What you want to do, in natural language |

### Options

| Flag | Description |
|---|---|
| `-h, --help` | Show help message |
| `-V, --version` | Show version |
| `-d, --debug` | Enable debug logging |
| `-e, --explain` | Show LLM explanation and source for the generated command |

## Configure Command

Use `configure` to update provider/model selection and config flags.

Interactive wizard:

```bash
tutr-cli configure
```

Non-interactive examples:

```bash
tutr-cli configure --provider openai --model openai/gpt-4o --show-explanation
tutr-cli configure --provider anthropic --model anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-6
tutr-cli configure --provider ollama --ollama-host http://localhost:11434
tutr-cli configure --clear-api-key
```

Security note: avoid passing secrets via `--api-key` because CLI args can be exposed in shell history and process listings. Prefer interactive `tutr-cli configure` prompts or provider API key environment variables.

## Configuration

Config is stored in `~/.tutr/config.json`. Environment variables override the config file.

| Environment Variable | Description | Default |
|---|---|---|
| `TUTR_MODEL` | LLM model to use ([litellm format](https://docs.litellm.ai/docs/providers)) | `gemini/gemini-3-flash-preview` |
| `GEMINI_API_KEY` | Gemini API key | — |
| `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` | Anthropic API key | — |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | OpenAI API key | — |
| `OLLAMA_HOST` | Ollama host URL override | `http://localhost:11434` |

You can edit settings with `tutr-cli configure` or directly in `~/.tutr/config.json`.

## Development

Run all quality checks:

```bash
uv run poe check
```

Run tests only:

```bash
uv run pytest
```

Lint and format:

```bash
uv run ruff check .
uv run ruff format .
```

Commit message:

docs: add data transmission privacy details

README.md, after:

# tutr - Terminal Utility for Con(T)extual Responses

A stupid simple, AI-powered terminal assistant that generates commands from natural language.

## Documentation

Docs website: https://spi3.github.io/tutr/index.html

## What does it do?

Generates terminal commands from natural language queries.

``` bash
> tutr git create and switch to a new branch called testing

  git checkout -b testing
```

``` bash
> tutr go back to the previous directory

  cd -
```

## Installation

Requires Python 3.10+.

```bash
pipx install tutr
```

Or run it without installing:

```bash
uvx tutr
```

For development from source:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/spi/tutr.git
cd tutr
uv sync
```

## Setup

On first run, tutr launches an interactive setup to select your provider, model, and API key:

```
$ tutr git "show recent commits"

Welcome to tutr! Let's get you set up.

Select your LLM provider:
  1. Gemini
  2. Anthropic
  3. OpenAI
  4. Ollama (local, no API key needed)

  Enter choice (1-4): 1

Enter your Gemini API key:
  API key:

Select a model:
  1. Gemini 3 Flash (recommended)
  2. Gemini 2.0 Flash
  3. Gemini 2.5 Pro

  Enter choice (1-3): 1

Configuration saved to ~/.tutr/config.json
```

Setup is skipped if `~/.tutr/config.json` already exists or provider API key environment variables are set.

To re-run or modify configuration at any time:

```bash
tutr-cli configure
```

## Usage

```
tutr <command> <what you want to do>
```

## Auto-start in Every Terminal

`tutr` is an interactive shell wrapper. To launch it automatically for every new
interactive terminal, add this to your shell rc file.

### Bash (`~/.bashrc`)

```bash
if [[ $- == *i* ]] && [[ -z "${TUTR_AUTOSTARTED:-}" ]] && [[ -z "${TUTR_SKIP_AUTOSTART:-}" ]]; then
  export TUTR_AUTOSTARTED=1
  exec tutr
fi
```

### Zsh (`~/.zshrc`)

```zsh
if [[ -o interactive ]] && [[ -z "${TUTR_AUTOSTARTED:-}" ]] && [[ -z "${TUTR_SKIP_AUTOSTART:-}" ]]; then
  export TUTR_AUTOSTARTED=1
  exec tutr
fi
```

Notes:
- `TUTR_AUTOSTARTED` prevents recursion when `tutr` sources your normal rc file.
- Set `TUTR_SKIP_AUTOSTART=1` before opening a terminal to temporarily bypass autostart.
- Active wrapped shells show a prompt prefix (default `[tutr]`) and set `TUTR_ACTIVE=1`.
- Customize the prefix with `TUTR_PROMPT_PREFIX` (example: `export TUTR_PROMPT_PREFIX="[ai]"`).
- Use `tutr-cli ...` if you want the original one-shot command generator behavior.

### Examples

```bash
tutr git "create and switch to a new branch called testing"
tutr sed "replace all instances of 'foo' with 'bar' in myfile.txt"
tutr curl "http://example.com and display all request headers"
```

### Arguments

| Argument | Description |
|---|---|
| `command` | The terminal command to get help with (e.g., `git`, `sed`, `curl`) |
| `query` | What you want to do, in natural language |

### Options

| Flag | Description |
|---|---|
| `-h, --help` | Show help message |
| `-V, --version` | Show version |
| `-d, --debug` | Enable debug logging |
| `-e, --explain` | Show LLM explanation and source for the generated command |

## Configure Command

Use `configure` to update provider/model selection and config flags.

Interactive wizard:

```bash
tutr-cli configure
```

Non-interactive examples:

```bash
tutr-cli configure --provider openai --model openai/gpt-4o --show-explanation
tutr-cli configure --provider anthropic --model anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-6
tutr-cli configure --provider ollama --ollama-host http://localhost:11434
tutr-cli configure --clear-api-key
```

Security note: avoid passing secrets via `--api-key` because CLI args can be exposed in shell history and process listings. Prefer interactive `tutr-cli configure` prompts or provider API key environment variables.

## Data sent to model providers

When `tutr` calls an LLM API, it may send:

- Your natural-language query.
- Command reference context collected from `<command> --help` and/or `man <command>`.
- Basic system information (for example platform/OS details).
- In shell wrapper mode, up to 2048 characters of recent terminal output after a failed command.

If you use remote providers, treat this information as data transmitted to that provider. Avoid including secrets in commands, queries, or terminal output.

## Configuration

Config is stored in `~/.tutr/config.json`. Environment variables override the config file.

| Environment Variable | Description | Default |
|---|---|---|
| `TUTR_MODEL` | LLM model to use ([litellm format](https://docs.litellm.ai/docs/providers)) | `gemini/gemini-3-flash-preview` |
| `GEMINI_API_KEY` | Gemini API key | — |
| `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` | Anthropic API key | — |
| `OPENAI_API_KEY` | OpenAI API key | — |
| `OLLAMA_HOST` | Ollama host URL override | `http://localhost:11434` |

You can edit settings with `tutr-cli configure` or directly in `~/.tutr/config.json`.

## Development

Run all quality checks:

```bash
uv run poe check
```

Run tests only:

```bash
uv run pytest
```

Lint and format:

```bash
uv run ruff check .
uv run ruff format .
```
